Add a guide page on XSS (#36412)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/security/attacks/xss/index.md

## An XSS example

Suppose the website for the user's bank is `my-bank.com`. The user is typically signed into it, and code in the website can access the user's account details and perform transactions. The website wants to display a welcome message, personalized for the current user. It displays the welcome in a {{htmlelement("Heading_Elements", "heading")}} element:

```html
<h1 id="welcome"></h1>
```

The page expects to find the current user's name in a [URL parameter](/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Web_mechanics/What_is_a_URL#parameters). It extracts the parameter value, and uses the value to create a personalized greeting message:

```js
const params = new URLSearchParams(window.location.search);
const user = params.get("user");
const welcome = document.querySelector("#welcome");

welcome.innerHTML = `Welcome back, ${user}!`;
```

Let's say this page is served from `https://my-bank.com/welcome`. To exploit the vulnerability, an attacker sends the user a link like this:

```html
<a href="https://my-bank.com/welcome?user=<img src=x onerror=alert('hello!')>">

>   Win a free iPad!</a>

Author: So this is what the linter does when I apply https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412#discussion_r1865181363. I'm not sure what this: https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412#discussion_r1867099697 means, AFAICS it just reformats the same way, which is what I was expecting. What am I missing here?

---
title: Cross-site scripting (XSS)
slug: Web/Security/Attacks/XSS
page-type: guide
---

> A cross-site scripting (XSS) attack is one in which an attacker is able to execute their code in the context of the target website.

Reviewer: Or perhaps even better ..

```suggestion
A cross-site scripting (XSS) attack is one in which an attacker is able to get a target site to execute malicious code as though it was part of the website.
```

> 

Reviewer: Consider having an overview heading. This is otherwise a bit of a wall of text.

```suggestion

## Overview

```

> A web browser downloads code from many different websites and runs it on the user's computer. Some of these websites may be highly trustworthy, and the user may use them for sensitive operations, such as financial transactions or medical advice. With others, such as a casual gaming site, the user may have no such trust relationship. The foundation of the browser's security model is that these sites should be kept separate from each other, so code from one site should not be able to access objects or {{glossary("credential", "credentials")}} in another site. This is called the [same-origin policy](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Same-origin_policy).

Reviewer: Feels like a few too many "may"

```suggestion
A web browser downloads code from many different websites and runs it on the user's computer. Some of these websites will be highly trustworthy, and the user may use them for sensitive operations, such as financial transactions or medical advice. With others, such as a casual gaming site, the user may have no such trust relationship. The foundation of the browser's security model is that these sites should be kept separate from each other, so code from one site should not be able to access objects or {{glossary("credential", "credentials")}} in another site. This is called the [same-origin policy](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Same-origin_policy).
```

![Diagram of 2 sites in the browsers, in separate worlds](same-origin.svg)

In a successful XSS attack, the attacker is able to subvert the same-origin policy, executing their code in the context of the target site. The code can then do anything that the site's own code can do, including, for example:

- access all the content of the site's loaded pages, and any content in local storage

> - make HTTP requests with the user's credentials, enabling them to impersonate the user or access sensitive data

Reviewer: So above I point to the ability to modify local data. The worry here is access, but also modification. Dunno if we need to got to this level of details. 

BTW note the MDN list style https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/MDN/Writing_guidelines/Writing_style_guide#lists

Author: I don't really understand the MDN style guide. It says:

> Sentences and phrases (i.e., sentence fragments missing a verb or a subject or both) in bulleted lists should include standard punctuation — sentences end with periods, phrases don't.

...but then gives as an example:

> In this example, we should include:
>
> - A condition, with a brief explanation.
> - A similar condition, with a brief explanation.
> - Yet another condition, with some further explanation.

...but none of these are sentences, why do they end with periods?

Reviewer: I would say typo ^^^

I find correct punctuation ugly so what I hope all this means is that this should be:

----

for example:

- Access all the content of the site's loaded pages, and any content in local storage
- Make HTTP requests with the user's credentials, enabling them to impersonate the user or access sensitive data

----

Anyway, @dipikabh is on leave for the rest of the year, so I guess as long as it is consistent it goes through.

![Diagram of attacker code running in target website](xss.svg)

> All XSS attacks depend on a website doing two things:

Reviewer: Perhaps forward reference that there are different types of attacks?

```suggestion
There are a number of different [types of XSS attack](LINK), but they all depend on a website doing ....:
```

Not filling it in because of my following note.

Author: I don't really want to do this, because I don't want to lean too heavily on the attack taxonomy below. "all attacks" doesn't just mean "all of the categories in that taxonomy" - for example, an attack that uses `<iframe src=` and one that uses `<img onerror` and one that uses `javascript:` might all be the same type of attack according to our taxonomy, but they are different attacks, but all depend on these two conditions.

Reviewer: Fair enough. I think my take on this was that if the types of attacks are useful then they should be mentioned earlier, and yours is that they aren't actually all that useful.

> All XSS attacks depend on a website doing two things:
> 
> 1. accepting some input that could have been crafted by an attacker
> 2. including this input in a page without _sanitizing_ it: that is, without ensuring that it won't be executable as JavaScript.

Reviewer: This could obviously be one thing. I prefer that unless you're going to expand on input - i.e. "such as user-entered text or URL parameters", and perhaps on "including in a page" to mention storage and later display.

```suggestion
All XSS attacks depend on a website taking input that could have been crafted by an attacker and including it in a page without _sanitizing_ it: that is, without ensuring that it can't be executed as JavaScript.
```

Author: Well it could be one thing but why? You still have "and" there: "taking input that could have been crafted by an attacker **and** including it in a page", so there are still implicitly two things.  Or you could write it like "including in a page input that could have been crafted by an attacker" but I think that doesn't show the chain so clearly.

I guess the reason I like it split up is that is shows this chain from the attacker to the content that the browser receives.

Reviewer: I think I just like terse text. You have a reason so good enough for me.

## An XSS example

Suppose the website for the user's bank is `my-bank.com`. The user is typically signed into it, and code in the website can access the user's account details and perform transactions. The website wants to display a welcome message, personalized for the current user. It displays the welcome in a {{htmlelement("Heading_Elements", "heading")}} element:

```html
<h1 id="welcome"></h1>
```

The page expects to find the current user's name in a [URL parameter](/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Web_mechanics/What_is_a_URL#parameters). It extracts the parameter value, and uses the value to create a personalized greeting message:

```js
const params = new URLSearchParams(window.location.search);
const user = params.get("user");
const welcome = document.querySelector("#welcome");

welcome.innerHTML = `Welcome back, ${user}!`;
```

Let's say this page is served from `https://my-bank.com/welcome`. To exploit the vulnerability, an attacker sends the user a link like this:

```html
<a href="https://my-bank.com/welcome?user=<img src=x onerror=alert('hello!')>">

>   Win a free iPad!</a
> >

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Win a free iPad!</a>
```

Author: I think this is Prettier silliness.

Reviewer: It is, but you can undo it by fixing - if you re-prettier it doesn't rebreak in the sameplaces.

Reviewer: I'm going to merge this, and if nothing complains it is IMO good.

Reviewer: Except sometimes it does. Ignore me.

```

When the user clicks the link:

1. The browser loads the page.
2. The page extracts the URL parameter named `user`, whose value is `<img src=x onerror=alert("hello!")>`.
3. The page then assigns this value to the `welcome` element's `innerHTML` property, which creates a new {{htmlelement("img")}} element, which has a `src` attribute value of `x`.

> 4. Since the `src` value generates an error, the `onerror` [event handler property](/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Events#inline_event_handlers_—_dont_use_these) is executed, and the attacker gets to run its code in the page.

Reviewer: Given this is trivial code but we've started with a real serious example ....

"In this case the code just generates an alert, but a real bank website would be vulnerable to Xxxxx" ...

or change the code to be something like `stealAllTheFilthyLucre()`.

Author: -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412/commits/24055ee467ec666b25acaf9472eb92622fa15b7c

I didn't use `stealAllTheFilthyLucre()` because I want it to be real minimal code you can run (I've tested this example and it does work).

Reviewer: Works for me.

There are two features of this code that make it vulnerable to XSS, and these two features are common to all XSS vulnerabilities:

1. it uses input that could have been crafted by an attacker: in this case, the URL parameter

> 2. it includes the input in the page without sanitizing it: in this case, by directly assigning the URL parameter value to the {{domxref("Element.innerHTML")}} property.

Reviewer: FYI this felt repetitive first time I read it. It still does, but it feels OK because clearly deliberate.

To prevent this attack, the page should sanitize the input. It could do this by explicitly encoding characters like <kbd><</kbd> before assigning the input to `innerHTML`. Alternatively (and more likely, if HTML is not required), the website could assign the input to the element's {{domxref("Node.textContent", "textContent")}} property instead, which will just assign the value as text.

In this page we'll explore the different types of XSS attacks, and the different methods that can be used to counter them.

## Types of XSS

> XSS attacks are commonly divided into three categories: _reflected XSS_, _stored XSS_, and _DOM-based XSS_. We'll describe them here: however, knowing or defining the categories is not as important as understanding where and how XSS attacks can originate, as this affects the ways they can be countered. Another useful taxonomy, which is related to this categorization but a little different, is whether they are client-side or server-side: that is whether the vulnerability is in the server or in the front-end code.

Author: I wonder if we should downplay the "_reflected XSS_, _stored XSS_, and _DOM-based XSS_" taxonomy. We need to mention it because all the guides do, but perhaps the client/server taxonomy is more useful, and connects better with things like templating and trusted types...

Reviewer: I quite like having stored XSS as a case because the ability to store the data is what makes an attack on a single user extend into any other users. So as long as the distinction of stored vs single user attack exists I'm a bit ambivalent.

### Reflected XSS

A reflected XSS attack is one in which an HTTP request contains the malicious JavaScript, and the server mistakenly includes that JavaScript in the page it returns to the client. The client then loads the page and runs the JavaScript, and the attack succeeds.

> For example, consider a website with a search function. The search page might look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, consider a website with a search function. The HTML for the search page might look like this:
```

```html
<h1>Search</h1>

<form action="/results">
  <label for="mySearch">Search for an item:</label>
  <input id="mySearch" type="search" name="search" />
  <input type="submit" />
</form>
```

When the user enters a search term and clicks "Submit", the browser makes a GET request to "/results", including the search term as a URL parameter, like this:

```plain
https://example.org/results?search=bananas
```

The server wants to display a list of search results, with a title indicating what the user searched for. It extracts the search term from the URL parameter. Here's what this might look like in [Express](/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs):

```js
app.get("/results", (req, res) => {
  const searchQuery = req.query.search;
  const results = ""; // getResults(searchQuery);
  res.send(`
   <h1>You searched for ${searchQuery}</h1>
   <p>Here are the results: ${results}</p>`);
});
```

(For simplicity, we've omitted the code that fetches the results.)

> 

Author: Remove note.

> (For simplicity, we've omitted the code that fetches the results.)
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Remove note.

To exploit this vulnerability, an attacker sends the user a link like this:

```html
<a href="http://example.org/results?search=<img src=x onerror=alert('hello')">

>   Win a free iPad!</a
> >

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Win a free iPad!</a>
```

```

When the user clicks the link:

1. The browser sends a GET request to the server. The request's URL parameter contains the malicous code.
2. The server extracts the URL parameter value and embeds it in the page.
3. The server returns the page to the browser, which runs it.

This is a lot like our first example, except the vulnerability is in the server, not the front-end code. The same pattern applies here though: the website accepts input that could have been crafted by the attacker, and includes that input in the page without sanitizing it.

### Stored XSS

> A stored XSS attack is functionally just like a reflected XSS attack, except the malicious JavaScript injected by the attacker is stored by the website, and served up to the user every time the page is accessed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A stored XSS attack is functionally just like a reflected XSS attack, except the malicious JavaScript injected by the attacker is stored by the website, and served up to every user who accesses the page.
```

Reviewer: Might be worth making the comment this is a nastier attack, because unlike reflection attacks, all users who open the page suffer.

APIs provided by third-party frameworks or libraries can also contain injection sinks. For example:

- [`dangerouslySetInnerHTML()`](https://react.dev/reference/react-dom/components/common#dangerously-setting-the-inner-html) in React
- [`html()`](https://api.jquery.com/html/) in jQuery

### Client versus server XSS

Alongside the three categories described above — reflected, stored, and DOM-based XSS — is a different but overlapping taxonomy, which distinguishes attacks based on whether they take place in the server side or the client side of a website.

DOM-based XSS is always a client-side attack, but reflected and stored XSS may be either server-side or client-side, depending on the website's architecture.

For example, consider a stored XSS attack which uses blog post comments to inject malicous code.

In one architecture, the user navigates to the blog post by following a normal link. The browser makes an HTTP GET request to the server, which retrieves the blog post and comments from a database, then feeds them into a template to construct the response as an HTML document. The browser receives the HTML document containing the malicious code, and renders it.

> ![Diagram of server-side XSS](server-side-xss.svg)

Author: I hope these diagrams are understandable! Really I just want to illustrate the two different architectures, to show that the XSS can happen in either client or server.

Reviewer: I understand the diagrams. I'm just not sure I believe the point :-(  See comment below https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412/files#r1865193925

In an alternative architecture, the website is implemented as a {{glossary("SPA", "single-page app")}}. When the user navigates to the blog post, the navigation is handled by the front-end JavaScript code. This code might get the blog post and comments from the server as JSON using the {{domxref("Window.fetch()", "fetch()")}} API, and then render them as HTML client-side.

![Diagram of client-side XSS](client-side-xss.svg)

> Although the attack and the result are the same in both cases, the point at which the malicious code is introduced into the HTML document is different: in the first case, it's the server code that is failing to sanitize the blog post comments before including them in the document, and in the second case, it's the front-end code. Note that in the second case, the attack is a stored XSS attack _and_ a DOM-based attack: in fact, all client-side attacks are DOM-based attacks.

Reviewer: Very pedantic, but the problematic point here is when the comment was first made and the data wasn't sanitized in the front end before being saved and then again in the server side before being saved. Don't know if you want to draw that out or hide it so you can make the architectural point.

Reviewer: Or to put it another way, I'm not **sure** the architecture is at all reverent to the real problem and solution. I haven't read properly to the end yet though.

Reviewer: I got to the end. I'm still not sure if I see any value in the client vs server distinction. The key here is the remedies - you never display _or store_ user-crafted input that hasn't first been sanitised, and you do it on both the server and the front end. All the time.

Author: >  I'm still not sure if I see any value in the client vs server distinction

The idea is that different tools are available in client and in server.

- Most obviously of course, if you are server-side rendering then you'll use the templating engine in the server (e.g. Django or Pug or whatever) and if you are client-side you will use the equivalent in the client (e.g. React).
- if you are client-side rendering, trusted types is relevant, if you are only in the server it is not
- if you are client-side rendering, an auto-CSP like [the one Netlify supports](https://www.netlify.com/blog/general-availability-content-security-policy-csp-nonce-integration/) is relevant, if you are in the server it is not. I haven't mentioned this but perhaps I should.

Reviewer: Good summary. Somehow I missed that this was your point. Perhaps I was just too out of it, or perhaps it isn't clear enough. I'll read again.

Reviewer: With the summary, I'm still not certain whether it is a useful taxonomy, but I am no longer certain that it is not :-)

I can now see what you're trying to do but I'm not sure a beginner reader can draw the conclusions you hope. Specifically, the last sentence is:

> The distinction between server and client XSS matters because effective defenses against XSS are different depending on where the vulnerability is.

So as I read I'd expect to understand perhaps that if I have a single page app, CSP is not a useful defense. Perhaps also that I need to use client side templating in a single page app. I didn't get that this was your point, so at the end of the doc, the whole section seems like quite a lot of description for an unsupported assertion.

Anyway, have a re-reread down from there and see if you agree. Then we can discuss.

Author: However, I can see that the linkage here between "types" and "defenses" isn't particularly clear, and that possibly this doc spends too much time on "types".

I suppose what I want to get across is something like: think about where in your website you're including content in the documents that the browser is executing.

******

In a "dynamic, server-side" website you're building pages on the server, using a framework like Django or Express, using templates to create pages, probably filling in the blanks from data pulled out of a database. And the document that the browser gets from the server is what will get executed by the browser: XSS injection, if it happens, will happen in the server during the templating process.

In a client-side-rendered website, such as an SPA, you're building pages on the client, using web APIs to do so, either directly or (more likely) indirectly through a framework like React. And it's in the course of this process that XSS injection will happen.

In both cases, you'll need to use output encoding, take care about the context in which you interpolate input, and sanitize input when you're not output encoding. In the client-side case, you can additionally use trusted types to ensure that sanitization is happening. In both cases, you should also use a CSP.

******

I suppose I feel that this helps to make it all more concrete and make a conceptual connection between the tools devs are using to build their site, and the defense tools we're going to discuss. But idk, maybe it isn't helpful?

Reviewer: > Why would you expect this? I really hope we're not giving people this idea and I don't understand what in this page could give people that impression.

No one else will be getting this. I got it from https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412#discussion_r1868211258 - misreading the last point.

Reviewer: > I suppose I feel that this helps to make it all more concrete and make a conceptual connection between the tools devs are using to build their site, and the defense tools we're going to discuss. But idk, maybe it isn't helpful?

I think the text you have in the section above "Consider where in your website you're including " is really helpful and clear.

I don't think that the "Client and server XSS" section in any way helps people make those connections. If it were me  I'd somehow replace it with your text above.

Just my two bits.

Author: OK, I've had a go at this in https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412/commits/392c06decd8f2bf5447fc64a56678b1330506b2d.

I extracted the "reflected XSS example" out and have it as another example after the first one. Since this is server-side and the other is client-side, I thought that was a good way to introduce and make concrete the distinction between client- and server-side rendering. I kept a bit about stored XSS, but don't really talk about that taxonomy much at all any more. I also sprinkled a couple more references to React into "Defenses", to try to tie that section more to the client/server thing (and to make it seem more concrete for people doing client-side rendering.

> The distinction between server and client XSS matters because effective defenses against XSS are different depending on where the vulnerability is.

Reviewer: How? If I have a vulnerability in the server/client or visa versa, how does the defence differ?

I mean with a statement like this, I would expect the categorisation to be used further down for the distinction to be useful. No such connection drawn?

Also the specific example worked through has the same flaw and solution - right?

Author: Same answer  as https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412#discussion_r1868211258.

One big difference is that trusted types are much more relevant when you're doing client-side rendering. Another is just that you're using different tools, but they will probably have similar features.

> Also the specific example worked through has the same flaw and solution - right?

Well yes in the abstract: encode/sanitize input, use a CSP. But the specific tools are different. Perhaps I should weaken "effective defenses against XSS" to be more about "tools you'll use to defend against XSS" ?

Reviewer: I like how it is right now. Tools would also work. I think there is a fairly clear picture conveyed that it is a "suite" of useful things you can do to reduce the chance of attacks.

## Defenses against XSS

If you need to include external input in your site's pages, there are two main defenses against XSS:

> 1. Using _output encoding_ and _sanitization_ to prevent input from becoming executable.

Reviewer: This is absolutely true, but I feel abstracts at least one case "too far". Specifically sanitising/encoding before storage - that isn't even mentioned - its all about the templates for display.

Author: As I've said, AFAICT from reading the OWASP docs and the docs for frameworks like Django and React, XSS defense is really about making sure input is safe at the point pages are constructed. Cleaning input on the way in is great but I don't see anything saying that this will absolve you from also cleaning it on the way in.

Reviewer: It doesn't have to absolve you to be important and worthy of mention. Sure you can argue that if you always sanitize on the way out you're gold. But most security is defence-in-depth - doing lots of things in the hope they stick.

The reason I think this is very important is simple: the level of harm from unsantized reflected data is restricted to the single user who somehow injected the bad data, whereas the stored data then affects all users.

Reviewer: Note though, this is just a response to the comment "in abstract". The current version of this doc could well mention this sufficiently.

2. Using a [Content Security Policy](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP) (CSP) to tell the browser which JavaScript or CSS resources it should be allowed to execute. This is a backup defense: if the first defense fails, so executable input makes it into a page, then a properly configured CSP should prevent the browser from executing it.

> 

Reviewer: Should we mention Trusted types here too?

Reviewer: Ah, I see you categorize that as a mechanism for keeping sanitization code in one place (ish). Fair enough. It is a bit more because you're also requiring santization in sinks.

Author: Yeah, I think trusted types is a part of sanitization. Could definitely mention it as part of (1) though.

> ### Output encoding

Reviewer: Interesting. I have been using sanitisation as a synonym for both this and sanitisation as you define it.

_Output encoding_ is the process by which characters in the input string that potentially make it dangerous are escaped, so they are treated as text instead of being treated as part of a language like HTML.

This is the appropriate choice when you want to treat input as text, for example, because your website uses templates that interpolate input into content, as in this [Django template](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/ref/templates/language/) excerpt:

```django
<p>You searched for \{{ search_term }}.</p>
```

> Most modern templating engines automatically perform output encoding. For example, if you pass `<img src=x onerror=alert('hello!')>` into the Django template above, it will be rendered as text:

Reviewer: Note, Django also lets you escape your input as part of server-side validation https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs/forms/Create_book_form

You should actually do both, since an attacker can craft forms to supply you with bad data even if you never render unescaped data.

> ![Screenshot of Django template output with escaped HTML](django-output.png)

Author: I wondered about including something similar for React, to emphasise that this is not only a thing on the server: wherever you interpolate content into pages, you have to do output encoding.

Reviewer: FWIW I think this is sufficient.

One of the most important parts of preventing XSS attacks is to use a well-regarded templating engine which performs robust output encoding, and read its documentation to understand any caveats about the protection it offers.

> The browser uses different rules to process different parts of a web page — HTML elements and their content, HTML attributes, inline styles, inline scripts. These are called contexts, and the type of encoding that needs to be done is different depending on the context in which the input is being interpolated.

Reviewer: Up to here I felt the story was coherent. 
But it felt like at this point we've gone from a topic about when to output encode to when/where you are allowed to allow user input at all and the risks of doing so. Those are different topics. 

So as a reader I'm starting to think "Are we saying a well designed templating engine won't help here? "

I'm getting weary, so perhaps again I'm seeing problems that aren't there.

Reviewer: Note, again, this is all good stuff, I'm just not sure there isn't some missing heading or similar.

Author: Suppose you've got a Django template like this:

```html
<div>{{ my_input }}</div>
```

In this context, the browser is evaluating the document as HTML. So what you want to protect against is the case where `my_input` is something like `<img src=x onerror="alert('XSS')">`. That is, where `my_input` is something that is treated as HTML by the browser. So the template escapes certain characters to prevent this:

- `<` is converted to &lt;
- `>` is converted to &gt;
- `'` (single quote) is converted to &#x27;
- `"` (double quote) is converted to &quot;
- `&` is converted to &amp;

So that works fine. But what if the template is like this:

```html
<div onmouseover="{{ my_input }}"></div>
```

? This is going to be treated as JavaScript by the browser, because it's in an HTML event handler attribute context. Now if `my_input` is `alert("XSS")`, then the encoding Django provides won't save you.

That's the general idea. 

> So as a reader I'm starting to think "Are we saying a well designed templating engine won't help here? "

Well, Django's templating engine won't. I have heard of "context-aware templating engines", which know the context of a particular inclusion and apply the right rules for the context. But I don't know of any actual examples.

So what we want to say is: yes, absolutely use a templating engine, but also understand what it will do for you and what it won't, and pay attention to the context in which you're including an input variable.

Reviewer: I do get this (and did before). I felt that this section was a context change. Looking at the text again, you do indeed position this:

> is to use a well-regarded templating engine which performs robust output encoding, **and read its documentation to understand any caveats about the protection it offers**.
> 
> The browser uses different rules to process different parts of a web page_

Even so, when I read this I still get a bit of a jarring feeling.
I think it might be that we aren't strong enough in the statement "The browser uses different rules to process different parts of a web page"

That's the beginning of an explanation, and I think what you need here is an instruction first - something along the lines of your your comment

> Use a templating engine is very important, but you also need to understand what it will do for you and what it won't, and pay attention to the context in which you're including an input variable.

Perhaps even as a warning. SOmething to think about.

Author: Reading this back, absolutely agree. It is a shift we should signal more clearly. What I've tried doing is:
- add a heading. I have "Contexts" which I don't much like but can't think of anything better. Parsing contexts?
- added a version of my comment above to provide an intro to the concept, before we list all the contexts.

I hope this is helpful?

-> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412/commits/0c3e5bc988679e2131058f3f5eea508d17d544d9

Reviewer: Yes, this is much better IMO.

- **HTML contexts**: input inserted between the tags of most HTML elements (except for {{htmlelement("style")}} or {{htmlelement("script")}}) is in the HTML context, as in the example above, and the encoding applied by template engines is mostly concerned with this context.
- **HTML attribute contexts**: inserting input as HTML attribute values is sometimes safe and sometimes not, depending on the attribute. In particular, event handler attributes like `onblur` are unsafe, as is the [`src`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/iframe#src) attribute of the {{htmlelement("iframe")}} element.

  It's important to quote placeholders for inserted attribute values, or an attacker may be able to insert an additional unsafe attribute in the value provided. For example, this template does not quote an inserted value:

  ```django example-bad
  <div class=\{{ my_class }}>...</div>
  ```

  An attacker can exploit this to inject an event handler attribute, by using input like `some_id onmouseover="alert('XSS!')"`. To prevent the attack, we can quote the placeholder:

  ```django example-good
    <div class="\{{ my_class }}">...</div>
  ```

> - **JavaScript and CSS contexts**: inserting input inside {{htmlelement("script")}} or {{htmlelement("style")}} tags is almost always unsafe.

Author: This is a rather simplified version of https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Cross_Site_Scripting_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html#output-encoding. I didn't talk about URL contexts, perhaps I should? I wondered about whether to include this at all but I think especially understanding the dangers of using input variables in HTML attributes is important.

### Sanitization

Templating engines typically allow developers to disable output encoding. This is necessary when developers want to insert untrusted content as HTML, not text. In this case it's up to the developer to ensure that the content is safe: for example, by sanitizing it.

> _Sanitization_ is the process of removing unsafe features from a string of HTML: for example, {{htmlelement("script")}} tags or inline event handlers. Since sanitization, like output encoding, is difficult to get right, it's advisable to use a reputable third-party library for it, and [DOMPurify](https://github.com/cure53/DOMPurify) is recommended by many experts including [OWASP](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Cross_Site_Scripting_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html#html-sanitization).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Sanitization_ is the process of removing unsafe features from a string of HTML: for example, {{htmlelement("script")}} tags or inline event handlers. Since sanitization, like output encoding, is difficult to get right, it's advisable to use a reputable third-party library for it. [DOMPurify](https://github.com/cure53/DOMPurify) is recommended by many experts including [OWASP](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Cross_Site_Scripting_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html#html-sanitization).
```

The Trusted Types API does not yet have good cross-browser support, but when it does it will be an important defense against DOM-based XSS attacks.

### Deploying a CSP

Output encoding and sanitization are all about preventing malicious scripts from getting into a site's pages. One of the main functions of a content security policy is to prevent malicious scripts from being executed even if they are in a site's pages. That is, it is a backup in case the other defenses fail.

The recommended approach to mitigating XSS with a CSP is a [strict CSP](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP#strict_csp), which uses a [nonce](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP#nonces) or a [hash](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP#hashes) to indicate to the browser which scripts it expects to see in the document. If an attacker manages to insert malicious `<script>` elements, then they won't have the correct nonce or hash, and the browser will not execute them. Additionally, various common XSS vectors are disallowed completely: inline event handlers, `javascript:` URLs, and APIs like `eval()` that execute their arguments as JavaScript.

> 

Reviewer: Is it worth including our own summary checklist?

Author: For everything? You mean something like:

- use a templating engine
- be aware of the context where you are including input, and whether your templating engine will cover this context
- if you must include content as HTML, sanitize it using a reputable library, and if you're doing this in the client, enforce trusted types and use the sanitizer you choose to create trusted types
- implement a strict CSP

? I think this is a good idea.

Reviewer: Yes.

Author: Haven't done this yet but will get to it tomorrow!

Author: -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412/commits/1bada9d102f8f20a018e48a96e34ce475b6dba55

```django
<div>\{{ my_input }}</div>
```

In this context, the browser is evaluating the input as HTML. So you need to protect against the case where `my_input` is something like `<img src=x onerror="alert('XSS')">`. That is, where `my_input` is something that is treated as HTML by the browser. The output encoding built into Django prevents this attack, by encoding characters like `<` and `>`.

However, suppose the template is like this:

```django
<div \{{ my_input }}></div>
```

The `my_input` variable will be treated as an HTML attribute by the browser. In this case, if `my_input` is `onmouseover="alert('XSS')"`, then the output encoding that Django provides won't prevent the attack.

The browser uses different rules to process different parts of a web page — HTML elements and their content, HTML attributes, inline styles, inline scripts. The type of encoding that needs to be done is different depending on the context in which the input is being interpolated.

What's safe in one context may be unsafe in another, and it's necessary to understand the context in which you are including untrusted content, and to implement any special handling that this demands.

> - **HTML contexts**: input inserted between the tags of most HTML elements (except for {{htmlelement("style")}} or {{htmlelement("script")}}) — the encoding applied by template engines is mostly concerned with this context.

Author: ```suggestion
- **HTML contexts**: input inserted between the tags of most HTML elements (except for {{htmlelement("style")}} or {{htmlelement("script")}}) is interpreted as HTML. The encoding applied by template engines is mostly concerned with this context.
```

```html
<h1>Search</h1>

<form action="/results">
  <label for="mySearch">Search for an item:</label>
  <input id="mySearch" type="search" name="search" />
  <input type="submit" />
</form>
```

When the user enters a search term and clicks "Submit", the browser makes a GET request to "/results", including the search term as a URL parameter, like this:

```plain
https://example.org/results?search=bananas
```

The server wants to display a list of search results, with a title indicating what the user searched for. It extracts the search term from the URL parameter. Here's what this might look like in [Express](/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs):

```js
app.get("/results", (req, res) => {
  const searchQuery = req.query.search;
  const results = getResults(searchQuery); // Implementation not shown
  res.send(`
   <h1>You searched for ${searchQuery}</h1>
   <p>Here are the results: ${results}</p>`);
});
```

To exploit this vulnerability, an attacker sends the user a link like this:

```html
<a href="http://example.org/results?search=<img src=x onerror=alert('hello')">

>   Win a free iPad!</a>

Reviewer: Reviewdog, you suck

```django
<div>\{{ my_input }}</div>
```

In this context, the browser is evaluating the input as HTML. So you need to protect against the case where `my_input` is something like `<img src=x onerror="alert('XSS')">`. That is, where `my_input` is something that is treated as HTML by the browser. The output encoding built into Django prevents this attack, by encoding characters like `<` and `>`.

However, suppose the template is like this:

```django
<div \{{ my_input }}></div>
```

The `my_input` variable will be treated as an HTML attribute by the browser. In this case, if `my_input` is `onmouseover="alert('XSS')"`, then the output encoding that Django provides won't prevent the attack.

The browser uses different rules to process different parts of a web page — HTML elements and their content, HTML attributes, inline styles, inline scripts. The type of encoding that needs to be done is different depending on the context in which the input is being interpolated.

What's safe in one context may be unsafe in another, and it's necessary to understand the context in which you are including untrusted content, and to implement any special handling that this demands.

> - **HTML contexts**: input inserted between the tags of most HTML elements (except for {{htmlelement("style")}} or {{htmlelement("script")}}) is in the HTML context, and the encoding applied by template engines is mostly concerned with this context.

Reviewer: Feels like we shouldn't state "is in the HTML context" again.

```suggestion
- **HTML contexts**: input inserted between the tags of most HTML elements (except for {{htmlelement("style")}} or {{htmlelement("script")}}) — the encoding applied by template engines is mostly concerned with this context.
```

- **HTML attribute contexts**: inserting input as HTML attribute values is sometimes safe and sometimes not, depending on the attribute. In particular, event handler attributes like `onblur` are unsafe, as is the [`src`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/iframe#src) attribute of the {{htmlelement("iframe")}} element.

>   It's also important to quote placeholders for inserted attribute values, or an attacker may be able to insert an additional unsafe attribute in the value provided. For example, this template does not quote an inserted value:

Reviewer: Its a pity the line break doesn't render in the bullet :-(

Author: yeah I agree, and thought the same thing when I wrote this! The really sad thing is, the markup is a separate paragraph, but for some unknown reason Yari's CSS applies a margin of zero for paragraphs in an `<li>` 🤦 :

<img width="1325" alt="Screen Shot 2024-12-11 at 9 03 34 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/78321931-8406-434e-a9e8-eaef8711298d" />

Reviewer: I'll leave it to you go chase the yar team :-)

  res.send(`
   <h1>You searched for ${searchQuery}</h1>
   <p>Here are the results: ${results}</p>`);
});
```

To exploit this vulnerability, an attacker sends the user a link like this:

```html
<a href="http://example.org/results?search=<img src=x onerror=alert('hello')">
  Get a free kitten!</a
>
```

When the user clicks the link:

1. The browser sends a GET request to the server. The request's URL parameter contains the malicous code.
2. The server extracts the URL parameter value and embeds it in the page.
3. The server returns the page to the browser, which runs it.

## Anatomy of an XSS attack

Like all XSS attacks, these two examples are possible because the website:

1. Uses input that could have been crafted by an attacker
2. Includes the input in the page without sanitizing it.

Both these examples use the same vector for the malicious input: the URL parameter. However, there are other vectors that attackers can use.

For example, consider a blog with comments. In a case like this, the website:

1. Allows anyone to submit comments using a {{htmlelement("form")}} element
2. Stores the comments in a database

> 3. Includes the comments in the that the website serves to other users.

Reviewer: REmoving full stop for consistency. But the reason I am doing this is that this is missing a word.

```suggestion
3. Includes the comments in pages that the website serves to other users.
```

A website that uses server-side rendering builds pages on the server, using a framework like Django or Express, most commonly by inserting values into page templates. XSS injection, if it happens, will happen in the server during the templating process. That's what we see in the second example: the code is injected in the back end, by the Express code inserting the URL parameter value into the document it's returning. The XSS attack code then runs when the browser evaluates the page.

In both cases, the general approach to defense is the same, and we'll go into this in detail in the next section. However, the specific tools and APIs you'll use will be different.

## Defenses against XSS

If you need to include external input in your site's pages, there are two main defenses against XSS:

1. Use _output encoding_ and _sanitization_ to prevent input from becoming executable. If you're rendering content in the browser, you can use the [Trusted Types API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Trusted_Types_API) to ensure that input is being passed through a sanitization function before being included in the page.

> 2. Use a [Content Security Policy](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP) (CSP) to tell the browser which JavaScript or CSS resources it should be allowed to execute. This is a backup defense: if the first defense fails, so executable input makes it into a page, then a properly configured CSP should prevent the browser from executing it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use a [Content Security Policy](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP) (CSP) to tell the browser which JavaScript or CSS resources it should be allowed to execute. This is a backup defense: if the first defense fails and executable input makes it into a page, then a properly configured CSP should prevent the browser from executing it.
```

### Output encoding

> _Output encoding_ is the process by which characters in the input string that potentially make it dangerous are escaped, so they are treated as text instead of being treated as part of a language like HTML.

Reviewer: Not a blocker, but it would be nice if there was a glossary for "escaping text" or similar to link here.

Author: I don't think that's a very friendly page! Agree that a glossary page would be good -> https://github.com/mdn/content/issues/37206.

This is the appropriate choice when you want to treat input as text, for example, because your website uses templates that interpolate input into content, as in this [Django template](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/ref/templates/language/) excerpt:

```django
<p>You searched for \{{ search_term }}.</p>
```

> Most modern templating engines automatically perform output encoding. For example, if you pass `<img src=x onerror=alert('hello!')>` into the Django template above, it will be rendered as text:

Reviewer: Because we dont have any link to escape we might modify this bit to more concretely demonstrate what is happening. Just a thought. This "pseudo-codes" one option:

```suggestion
Most modern templating engines automatically perform output encoding. For example, if you pass `<img src=x onerror=alert('hello!')>` into the Django template above, it will be converted to Xxxxxx, and rendered as thought the original content was text:
```

Author: I did something a little different here, listing [the conversions that Django does](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.0/ref/templates/language/#automatic-html-escaping) -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412/commits/4557801e92cb0bd450aeda778fa9fda5a31408d3. I think this should make it more concrete. The "is converted to" is a repetitive but I couldn't think of anything prettier, I tried a table but the rendering of them in Yari is ugly.

Reviewer: Even so https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412#pullrequestreview-2504910198

Reviewer: (which is to say I like what you did, but I still think what I suggested is useful)

![Screenshot of Django template output with escaped HTML](django-output.png)

Similarly, if you're doing client-side rendering with React, values embedded in JSX are automatically encoded. For example, consider a JSX component like this:

```jsx
import React from "react";

export function App(props) {
  return <div>Hello, {props.name}</div>;
}
```

> If we pass `<img src=x onerror=alert('XSS')>` into `props.name`, it will be rendered as:
> 
> ![Screenshot of JSX component output with escaped HTML](jsx-output.png)

Reviewer: I'm OK with the image, but it is a little repetitive, so up to you, but you could do this

```suggestion
If we pass `<img src=x onerror=alert('XSS')>` into `props.name`, it will be rendered as though it were text, in the same way as above.
```

Author: I like the repetition as showing clearly what the React situation is, but I have made it (I hope) a bit less clunky by using blockquotes instead of screenshots (which has other advantages too of course like file size, editability, theme alignment).

Reviewer: Definitely less clunky :-)

One of the most important parts of preventing XSS attacks is to use a well-regarded templating engine which performs robust output encoding, and read its documentation to understand any caveats about the protection it offers.

#### Document contexts

Even if you're using a templating engine which automatically encodes HTML, you need to be aware of where in the document you are including untrusted content. For example, suppose you have a Django template like this:

```django
<div>\{{ my_input }}</div>
```

> In this context, the browser is evaluating the input as HTML. So you need to protect against the case where `my_input` is something like `<img src=x onerror="alert('XSS')">`. That is, where `my_input` is something that is treated as HTML by the browser. The output encoding built into Django prevents this attack, by encoding characters like `<` and `>`.

Reviewer: Maybe ....

```suggestion
In this context, the input is inside `<div>` tags, so the browser evaluates it as HTML. So you need to protect against the case where `my_input` is HTML that defines executable code, such as `<img src=x onerror="alert('XSS')">`. The output encoding built into Django prevents this attack, by encoding characters like `<` and `>` as the HTML entities `&lt;` and `&gt;`.
```

Reviewer: I think you're probably overthinking it. You've provided an example that you're referring to, and it is not your example case of concern, you've also separately provided the attribute case, so that is clearly what you are trying to differentiate.

If I was concerned about this I might modify the above to

```suggestion
In this context, the input is the content of a `<div>` element, so the browser evaluates it as HTML. So you need to protect against the case where `my_input` is HTML that defines executable code, such as `<img src=x onerror="alert('XSS')">`. The output encoding built into Django prevents this attack, by encoding characters like `<` and `>` as the HTML entities `&lt;` and `&gt;`.
```

However, suppose the template is like this:

```django
<div \{{ my_input }}></div>
```

> The `my_input` variable will be treated as an HTML attribute by the browser. In this case, if `my_input` is `onmouseover="alert('XSS')"`, then the output encoding that Django provides won't prevent the attack.

Reviewer: Following on from above comment https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412/files#r1883023309 (I find the use of context useful because we're linking to the heading)

```suggestion
In this context the browser will treat the `my_input` variable as an HTML attribute. If `my_input` is `onmouseover="alert('XSS')"`, the output encoding provided by Django won't prevent the attack.
```

const user = params.get("user");
const welcome = document.querySelector("#welcome");

welcome.innerHTML = `Welcome back, ${user}!`;
```

Let's say this page is served from `https://my-bank.example.com/welcome`. To exploit the vulnerability, an attacker sends the user a link like this:

```html
<a
  href="https://my-bank.example.com/welcome?user=<img src=x onerror=alert('hello!')>">
  Get a free kitten!</a
>
```

When the user clicks the link:

1. The browser loads the page.
2. The page extracts the URL parameter named `user`, whose value is `<img src=x onerror=alert("hello!")>`.
3. The page then assigns this value to the `welcome` element's `innerHTML` property, which creates a new {{htmlelement("img")}} element, which has a `src` attribute value of `x`.
4. Since the `src` value generates an error, the `onerror` [event handler property](/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Events#inline_event_handlers_—_dont_use_these) is executed, and the attacker gets to run its code in the page.

In this case the code just displays an alert, but in a real banking website, the attacker code would be able to do anything that the bank's own front-end code could.

> ### Code injection in the back end

Reviewer: Is it just me, or is this a terrible double ententre?

Even if not, suggest it is more clear to use  "server" and "browser" for these cases?

Author: Maybe I've been living in Canada too long!

2. Use a [Content Security Policy](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP) (CSP) to tell the browser which JavaScript or CSS resources it should be allowed to execute. This is a backup defense: if the first defense fails and executable input makes it into a page, then a properly configured CSP should prevent the browser from executing it.

### Output encoding

_Output encoding_ is the process by which characters in the input string that potentially make it dangerous are escaped, so they are treated as text instead of being treated as part of a language like HTML.

This is the appropriate choice when you want to treat input as text, for example, because your website uses templates that interpolate input into content, as in this [Django template](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/ref/templates/language/) excerpt:

```django
<p>You searched for \{{ search_term }}.</p>
```

Most modern templating engines automatically perform output encoding. For example, Django's templating engine performs the following conversions:

- `<` is converted to `&lt;`

- `>` is converted to `&gt;`

- `'` is converted to `&#x27;`

- `"` is converted to `&quot;`

- `&` is converted to `&amp;`

> This means that if you pass `<img src=x onerror=alert('XSS!')>` into the Django template above, it will be rendered as text:

Reviewer: Can we be even more obvious?

```suggestion
This means that if you pass `<img src=x onerror=alert('XSS!')>` into the Django template above, it will be converted to `&lt:img src=x onerror=alert(&#x27;XSS!&#x27;)&gt;`, which is rendered as the following text:
```

Reviewer: Note, I saw your response https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/36412#discussion_r1884383667 after I wrote this, but I still feel it is useful.

Mostly because what we have without this is "X renders as the text X", which is frankly a bit uninteresting. While X is converted to Y, which renders as X is very exciting :-)
